AAOIFI Financial Accounting Standard 32
Ijarah

Objective of the standard
1. The objective of this standard is to set out principles for the classification, recognition,
measurement, presentation and disclosure for Ijarah (asset Ijarah, including different forms of Ijarah
Muntahia Bittamleek) transactions entered into by the Islamic financial institutions (the institutions)
on both ends of the transaction i.e. as a lessor and lessee. An institution shall consider the terms and
conditions of the contracts and all relevant facts and circumstances when applying this standard and
shall apply the same on a consistent basis.

Scope
2. This standard shall apply for accounting and financial reporting for a lessor or lessee, for all Ijarah
(asset Ijarah, including Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek (Ijarah MBT)) transactions unless specifically
excluded under paragraph 3.
3. This standard shall not be applied for accounting of:
a. Sukuk based on Ijarah which shall be subject to accounting under respective FAS;
b. Ijarah transactions for exploration, extraction, harvesting and otherwise use and sale of
natural resources; and
c. service Ijarah transactions including employment / labour contracts and hiring of
professional services and other service based contracts (not involving tangible assets),
including intellectual property and detachable rights.

Definitions
4. For the purpose of interpreting and applying this standard, the following short definitions are
relevant:
a. Combined asset – is an underlying asset subject to Ijarah MBT through gradual transfer, or
any other form of Ijarah MBT, in which proportionate ownership and right-of-use co-exist on
the same asset;
b. Commencement date – is the date on which the lessor makes an underlying asset available
for use by the lessee, in a condition suitable for intended purpose and use;
f. Diminishing Musharaka (Shirkat-ul-Milk) Ijarah – is a hybrid Ijarah product similar to ‘Ijarah
Muntahia Bittamleek through gradual transfer’ comprising of:
i. a co-ownership in which two parties share the ownership of a tangible asset in an
agreed proportion (without intention to engage in common business with respect to
such asset); and
ii. a promise under which one of the co-owners undertakes to buy in periodic
installments the proportionate share of the other co-owner until the ownership /
title to such tangible asset is completely transferred to the purchasing co-owner
(whereby each transaction takes place as a sale); and
iii. a separate Ijarah contract, whereby one co-owner (lessor) rents out its
proportionate share in the asset to the other co-owner (lessee);
l. Ijarah – is a contract, or part of contractual arrangement, that transfers the usufruct of an
asset (the underlying asset) for a period of time in exchange for an agreed consideration,
from a lessor (the owner of the underlying asset) to a lessee.
n. Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek (Ijarah MBT) – is a hybrid Ijarah arrangement which, in addition
to the Ijarah contract, includes a promise resulting in transfer of the ownership of the
underlying asset to the lessee, either after the end of the term of the Ijarah period or by
stages during the term of the contract. Such transfer of the ownership is executed through a
sale or a gift, or a series of sales transactions – independent of Ijarah contract;
y. Right-of-use asset (usufruct asset) – is a kind of intangible assets that represents a lessee’s
legally enforceable right-of-use (or control of usufruct) of an underlying asset (normally
being a tangible asset) for the Ijarah term, and includes a ‘combined asset’ for the purpose
of application of this standard;

Identifying (and separating) an Ijarah
5. At inception of a contract, an institution shall assess whether the contract is, or contains, an Ijarah. A
contract is, or contains, an Ijarah if the contract transfers the usufruct (but not control) of an
identified asset for a period of time in exchange for an agreed consideration.

Classification of Ijarah
12. An institution, in its capacity either as a lessor or lessee, shall classify each of its Ijarah as:
a. an operating Ijarah (see paragraph 4(v));
b. an Ijarah MBT (see paragraph 4(n)), including the following types:
i. an Ijarah MBT – with expected transfer of ownership after the end of the Ijarah term
– either through a sale or a gift; or
ii. an Ijarah MBT with gradual transfer – with gradual transfer of ownership during the
Ijarah term (including Diminishing Musharaka Ijarah).

Accounting and financial reporting by the lessee
Initial recognition
21. At the commencement date, a lessee shall recognize:
a. a right-of-use (usufruct) asset; and
b. a net Ijarah liability, duly comprising of the following elements:
i. gross Ijarah liability;
ii. deferred Ijarah cost (shown as a contra-liability).
Initial recognition of right-of-use asset
22. At the commencement date, a lessee shall measure the right-of-use asset at cost.
23. The cost of the right-of-use asset shall comprise:
a. the “prime cost” of the right-of-use asset (determined in line with the paragraphs 31 or 32);
b. any initial direct costs incurred by the lessee; and
c. dismantling or decommissioning costs.
Prime cost of the right-of-use asset
31. At the commencement date, the prime cost of the right-of-use asset (except for an operating Ijarah)
shall comprise of:
a. either of:
i. preferably, the cost of the underlying asset – if acquired specifically by the lessor for
the purpose of the intended Ijarah transaction; or
ii. alternatively, the fair value of the underlying asset as of the commencement date –
if not acquired specifically by the lessor for the purpose of the intended Ijarah
transaction or if the cost is not known to the lessee;
b. less any expected terminal value of the underlying asset (at the end of the Ijarah term),
being either of:
i. the promised value (being nil value, in case of expected gift) at which the transfer
may take place after the end of the Ijarah term; or
ii. expected fair value of the underlying asset at the end of the Ijarah term, in case of
absence of a promised value.

Subsequent measurement of the right-of-use asset
33. After the commencement date, a lessee shall measure the right-of-use asset at:
a. cost;
b. less – any accumulated amortization;
c. less – any accumulated impairment losses;
d. add / less – adjustment for any effect of Ijarah modification or reassessment specified in
paragraphs 44-46.
Amortization of right-of-use asset
34. A lessee shall amortize the right-of-use asset from the commencement date to the end of the useful
economic life of the right-of-use asset which coincides with the end of the Ijarah term.

Accounting and financial reporting by the lessor
Initial Recognition
Timing of recognition of underlying asset
61. Underlying asset shall be recognized in the books of the lessor once it controls the underlying asset
i.e. the time when it essentially acquires substantially all risks and rewards incidental to ownership
of such underlying asset.
Recognition of underlying asset
62. Underlying asset shall be initially recognized at cost.
Subsequent measurement
66. Subsequent to initial recognition, the underlying assets shall be measured at cost less accumulated
depreciation less accumulated impairment, if any.
Depreciation
67. Depreciable amount of an underlying asset shall be charged to income over its useful economic life
on a pattern which is reflective of the expected pattern of economic benefits arising from the same.
Ijarah revenue and costs
Ijarah revenue
74. Ijarah revenue shall be recognized in income statement of the lessor on an accrual basis, applying,
either:
a. a straight-line basis – preferred method; or
b. another systematic basis.

Ijarah MBT: transfer of underlying asset’s ownership
Timing of recognition of the transfer of underlying asset
86. In case of an Ijarah MBT, the transfer of asset’s ownership may take place through transfer of
control (entailing risks and rewards incidental to ownership of such asset) under a separate (i.e.
separate from the Ijarah contract):
a. contract of sale – after the end of the Ijarah term (including, in certain circumstances, after
early termination of the Ijarah term); or
b. contract of gift – after the end of the Ijarah term; or
c. contracts of sale of proportionate ownership (generally in form of ownership units) – during
the Ijarah term.

Effective date
110. This standard shall be effective for the financial periods beginning on or after 01 January 2021. Early
adoption is permitted.