Financial Accounting Standard No. (4)
Musharaka Financing

Statement of the Standard

1. Scope of the Standard
This standard shall apply to Musharaka financing transactions carried out
by Islamic banks whether by means of a constant Musharaka (short or
long-term) or a diminishing Musharaka (one which ends with transferring
ownership to one party). This shall apply whether the Islamic bank finances
its share in Musharaka capital exclusively out of its own funds, out of the
pool of commingled funds comprising the Islamic bank’s own funds and
unrestricted investment accounts or out of restricted investment accounts.
The standard shall also apply to the transactions pertaining to the Islamic
bank’s share in Musharaka profits or losses.
Should the requirements of this standard contradict the Islamic bank’s
charter or the laws and regulations of the country in which it operates,
a disclosure should be made of the contradiction. (para. 1)
This standard does not include the following:
a) Mudaraba;
b) Participations;
c) Zakah on Musharaka funds; and
d) Accounting treatment of Musharaka transactions in the partner’s
(client’s) books and the Musharaka records. (para. 2)

2. Accounting Treatment of Musharaka Financing
2/1 Recognition of the Islamic bank’s share in Musharaka capital at the
time of contracting
The Islamic bank’s share in Musharaka capital (cash or kind) shall
be recognized when it is paid to the partner or made available to him
on the account of the Musharaka. This share shall be presented in
the Islamic bank’s books under a Musharaka financing account with
(name of client) and it shall be included in the financial statements
under the heading “Musharaka Financing”. (para. 3)

2/2 Measurement of the Islamic bank’s share in Musharaka capital at the
time of contracting
2/2/1 The Islamic bank’s share in the Musharaka capital provided in
cash shall be measured by the amount paid or made available
to the partner on the account of the Musharaka. (para. 4)
2/2/2 The Islamic bank’s share in Musharaka capital provided in kind
(trading assets or non-monetary assets for use in the venture)
shall be measured at the fair value of the assets (the value
agreed between the partners), and if the valuation of the assets
results in a difference between fair value and book value, such
difference shall be recognized as profit or loss to the Islamic
bank itself. (para. 5)
2/2/3 Expenses of the contracting procedures incurred by one or both
parties (e.g., expenses of feasibility studies and other similar
expenses) shall not be considered as part of the Musharaka
capital unless otherwise agreed by both parties. (para. 6)

2/3 Measurement of the Islamic bank’s share in Musharaka capital after
contracting at the end of a financial period
2/3/1 The Islamic bank’s share in the constant Musharaka capital
shall be measured at the end of the financial period at historical
cost (the amount which was paid or at which the asset was
valued at the time of contracting). (para. 7)
2/3/2 The Islamic bank’s share in the diminishing Musharaka shall
be measured at the end of a financial period at historical cost
after deducting the historical cost of any share transferred to the
partner (such transfer being by means of a sale at fair value).
The difference between historical cost and fair value shall
be recognized as profit or loss in the Islamic bank’s income
statement. (para. 8)
2/3/3 If the diminishing Musharaka is liquidated before complete
transfer is made to the partner, the amount recovered in respect
of the Islamic bank’s share shall be credited to the Islamic
bank’s Musharaka financing account and any resulting profit
or loss, namely the difference between the book value and the
recovered amount, shall be recognized in the Islamic bank’s
income statement. (para. 9)

2/4 Recognition of the Islamic bank’s share in Musharaka profits or
losses
2/4/1 Profits or losses in respect of the Islamic bank’s share in
Musharaka financing transactions that commence and end
during a financial period shall be recognized in the Islamic
bank’s accounts at the time of liquidation. (para. 11)
2/4/2 In the case of a constant Musharaka that continues for more
than one financial period, the Islamic bank’s share of profits
for any period, resulting from partial or final settlement be-
tween the Islamic bank and the partner, shall be recognized
in its accounts for that period to the extent that the profits
are being distributed; the Islamic bank’s share of losses for
any period shall be recognized in its accounts for that period
to the extent that such losses are being deducted from its share
of the Musharaka capital. (para. 12)

2/5 Disclosure requirements
2/5/1 Disclosure should be made in the notes to the financial state-
ments for a financial reporting period if the Islamic bank has
made during that period a provision for a loss of its capital in
Musharaka financing transactions. (para. 17)
2/5/2 The disclosure requirements stated in Financial Accounting
Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the
Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institu-
tions should be observed. (para. 18)

3. Effective Date
This Standard shall be effective for financial statements for fiscal periods
beginning 1 Muharram 1418 A.H. or 1 January 1998 A.D. (para. 19)

Appendix (E)
Definitions
Musharaka
A form of partnership between the Islamic bank and its clients whereby
each party contributes to the capital of partnership in equal or varying degrees
to establish a new project or share in an existing one, and whereby each of
the parties becomes an owner of the capital on a permanent or declining
basis and shall have his due share of profits. However, losses are shared
in proportion to the contributed capital. It is not permissible to stipulate
otherwise.
Constant Musharaka
It is a Musharaka in which the partners’ shares in the capital remain
constant throughout the period as specified in the contract.
Diminishing Musharaka
It is a Musharaka in which the Islamic bank agrees to transfer gradually
to the other partner its (the Islamic bank’s) share in the Musharaka, so that
the Islamic bank’s share declines and the other partner’s share increases
until the latter becomes the sole proprietor of the venture.
Participation
It is a Musharaka in which the Islamic bank owns shares or units representing
an equity stake in another firm’s capital.
Mudaraba
It is a partnership in profit between capital and work. It is conducted
between investment accountholders as owners of capital and the Islamic
bank as a Mudarib. The Islamic bank announces its willingness to accept the
funds of investment amount holders, the sharing of profits being as agreed
upon between the two parties, and the losses being borne by the owner
of funds except if they were due to misconduct, negligence or violation of
the conditions agreed upon by the Islamic bank.