Financial Accounting Standard No. (10)
Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Statement of the Standard

1. Scope of the Standard
This standard addresses the accounting rules of Istisna’a and parallel
Istisna’a contracts in the financial statements of Islamic banks relating
to measuring and recognizing the costs and revenues from Istisna’a and
parallel Istisna’a, the gains and losses accruing therefrom, and their
presentation and disclosure in the financial statements of the Islamic
bank.
Should the requirements of this standard contradict the Islamic bank’s
charter or the laws and regulations of the country in which it operates
and the Islamic bank had to comply with such requirements, a disclosure
should be made to the point of conflict. (para. 1)

2. Accounting Treatment by the Islamic Bank As Al-Sani’ (A Seller)
2/1 Istisna’a costs
a) Istisna’a costs consist of: (I) Direct costs, in particular costs of
producing Al-Masnoo’; and (II) Indirect costs relating to the
contract as allocated on an objective basis. General and admin-
istrative expenses, selling expenses, research and development
costs shall not be included in an Istisna’a contract costs. (para. 2)
b) Istisna’a costs incurred during a financial period, as well as pre-
contract costs as described in (c) below, shall be recognized in an
Istisna’a work-in-progress account, and reported under assets in
the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank. (In case of
parallel Istisna’a, this account shall be called Istisna’a costs account
as stated in 2/2 a). Amounts billed to Al-Mustasni’ will be debited
to Istisna’a accounts receivable account and credited to an Istisna’a
billings account. The balance of the latter account shall be offset
against Istisna’a work-in-progress account in the appropriate side
of the Islamic bank’s statement of financial position. (para. 3)
c) Pre-contract costs shall be recognized as deferred costs when they
are incurred, and accounted for upon contracting by transferring
them to the Istisna’a work-in-progress account. If no contract is
signed and it is unlikely that it will be signed in the future, then
the deferred costs in question shall be written-off to expense
during the current financial period. (para. 4)

2/2 Contract costs in parallel Istisna’a
a) When a parallel Istisna’a exists, the costs of Istisna’a include the
price fixed in the parallel Istisna’a contract (direct costs), together
with indirect costs including any pre-contract costs as described in
2/1(c). When the subcontractor bills the Islamic bank for contract
costs, these will be debited to Istisna’a costs account and credited
to the subcontractor’s Al-Sani’ account under Istisna’a accounts
payable. The Istisna’a costs account shall be reported under assets
in the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank. (para. 5)
b) Progress billings made by the Islamic bank to the ultimate purchaser
(Al-Mustasni’) during the period shall be accounted for by debiting
an Istisna’a accounts receivable account. The same amount shall
also be credited to Istisna’a billings account, the balance of which
shall be offset against Istisna’a cost account in the Islamic bank’s
financial statements. (para. 6)

2/3 Istisna’a revenue and profit at the end of a financial period
2/3/1 Istisna’a revenue and profit
Istisna’a revenue is the total price agreed upon between the
Islamic bank as Al-Sani’ and the client as Al-Mustasni’, including
the Islamic bank’s profit margin on the contract. Istisna’a revenue
and the associated profit margin are recognized in the Islamic
bank’s financial statements according to either the percentage of
completion or the completed contract methods as set up below,
taking into consideration what is stated in item 2/3/1/2. (para. 7)
2/3/1/1 Percentage of completion method
a) A part of the contract price commensurate with the
work performed during each period in which the contract is being executed shall be recognized as
revenue for that period. (para. 8)
b) The portion of the Istisna’a profit margin recognized during the financial period (Istisna’a profit margin
being the difference between the cash price of Al-Masnoo’ to the ultimate purchaser and the Islamic
bank’s estimated total Istisna’a costs) shall be added to the Istisna’a work-in-progress account. Thus, at
any point in time, the balance of the Istisna’a work-in-progress account will include the amount of
profit recognized to date subject to deduction of any anticipated contract losses, as will be indicated in 2/4
(a) below. (para. 9)
2/3/1/2 Completed contract method
In unusual circumstances where both the percentage of completion and the expectedand the expected cost to complete the contract cannot be estimated with reasonable accuracy
at the end of the financial period, no contract revenue shall be recognized until the contract is fully completed.
Thus, until that date, the accumulated contract costs will be carried forward on the Istisna’a work-in-progress
account, without any profit element being recognized. (para. 10)

2/3/2 Deferred profits
The contract price may be fully paid by Al-Mustasni’ by instalments during the contract based on progress in work.
However, all or part of the price may be paid following completion of the contract. In the latter case, the difference
between the total price that is paid during the contract and the agreed total price –defined as deferred profits– shall be
offset against Istisna’a accounts receivable in the Islamic bank’s statement of financial position. This treatment shall
apply whether the percentage of completion method or the completed contract method is used for recognizing and
measuring Istisna’a revenues and profit. (para. 11)
Deferred profits shall be recognized using one of the two following methods:
a) Proportionate allocation of deferred profits over the future financial period of credit whereby each financial period
shall carry its portion of profits irrespective of whether or not cash is received. This is the preferred method. (para. 12)
b) As and when each instalment is received. This method shall be used based on a decision by the Shari’a supervisory
board of the Islamic bank or if it is required by supervisory authorities. (para. 13)

2/4 Measurement of Istisna’a work-in-progress, Istisna’a costs and treat-
ment of contract losses at the end of a financial period
a) In the event of applying the percentage of completion method for the recognition of Istisna’a revenue and profit, Istisna’a work-
in-progress shall be measured and reported in the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank at a value not exceeding its
cash equivalent value (i.e., the difference between the contract price and the expected additional cost to complete the contract).
(para. 19)
b) Any expected loss resulting from the valuation of Istisna’a work-in-progress at the end of a financial period shall be recognized
and reported in the Islamic bank’s income statement. (para. 20)

3. Accounting Treatment of Istisna’a by the Islamic Bank As Al-Mustasni’ (A Buyer)
3/1 Istisna’a billings of completed jobs
a) The amount of progress billings received shall be recognized by debiting an Istisna’a costs account and presented under assets
in the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank. The corresponding credit shall be made to Istisna’a accounts payable
to Al-Sani’. (para. 29)

3/2 Receipt of Al-Masnoo’
3/2/1 Receipt of Al-Masnoo’ in conformity with specifications and schedule
a) The received (Al-Masnoo’) assets shall be recorded at historical cost (i.e., the book value) of the Istisna’a costs account. (para. 31)

4. Disclosure Requirements
4/1 The Islamic bank shall disclose the following in its financial statements:
a) Revenues and profits of Istisna’a contracts recognized for the financial period. (para. 37)
b) Accounting methods used for measuring revenues and profits of Istisna’a contracts for the financial period. (para. 38)
c) Cumulative (actual) costs of contracts in progress as well as revenues and profits recognized up to the end of the current financial period. (para. 39)
d) The amount of retention on contracts in progress until they are completed according to the specifications and contractual conditions. (para. 40)
e) Istisna’a receivable and payable accounts presented in the appropriate side of the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank. These accounts shall not be offset against each other. (para. 41)

5. Effective Date
This Standard shall be effective for the financial statements for fiscal periods beginning 1 Muharram 1420 A.H. or 1 January 1999 A.D. (para. 47)

Appendix (F)
Definitions
Istisna’a
It is a sale contract between Al-Mustasni’ (the buyer) and Al-Sani’, (the
seller) whereby Al-Sani’ - based on an order from Al-Mustasni’- undertakes
to have manufactured or otherwise acquire Al-Masnoo’ (the subject matter
of the contract) according to the specifications and sell it to Al-Mustasni’
for an agreed upon price and method of settlement whether that be at the
time of contracting, by instalments or deferred to a specific future time. It
is a condition of the Istisna’a contract that Al-Sani’ should provide either
the raw material or the labour.
Parallel Istisna’a
If Al-Mustasni’ (the purchaser) does not stipulate in the contract that
Al-Sani’ (the seller) should manufacture Al-Masnoo’ by himself, then
Al-Sani’ may enter into a second Istisna’a contract in order to fulfil his
contractual obligations in the first contract. The second contract is called
Parallel Istisna’a.
Istisna’a Work-in-Progress Account
This is an asset account in which the Istisna’a contract costs are accumulated. When the percentage-of-completion method is used, a portion of
Istisna’a profit commensurate with the work completed during a financial
period is also debited to this account.
Percentage-of-Completion Method
An accounting method that recognizes the revenues and profits of Istisna’a
contracts as work progresses.
Completed-Contract Method
An accounting method that recognizes Istisna’a costs and revenues only
in the financial period in which the contract is completed.